\input texinfo

@titlepage
@title Hemlock Command Implementor's Manual
@author Bill Chiles
@author Rob MacLachlan
@subtitle February 1992
@subtitle CMU-CS-89-132-R1

@center
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
@end center

@center
This is a revised version of Technical Report CMU-CS-87-159.
@end center

@abstract
This document describes how to write commands for the @Hemlock text editor, as
of version M3.2.  @Hemlock is a customizable, extensible text editor whose
initial command set closely resembles that of ITS/TOPS-20 @Emacs.  @Hemlock is
written in the CMU Common Lisp and has been ported to other implementations.
@end abstract

This research was supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DOD), and monitored by the Avionics Laborotory, Air Force
Wright Aeronatutical Laboratories, Aeronautical Systems Division
(AFSC), Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45344-6543 under Contract
F33615-87-C-1499, ARPA Order No. 4976, Amendment 20.

The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the
authros and should not be interpreted as respresnting the official
policies, either rexpressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency or the U.S. government.

@chapter
@section Introduction
Some primitives such as @funref[prompt-for-key] and commands such as EMACS
query replace read key-events directly from the keyboard instead of using the
command interpreter.  To encourage consistency between these commands and to
make them portable and easy to customize, there is a mechanism for defining
@i[logical key-events].

A logical key-event is a keyword which stands for some set of key-events.  The
system globally interprets these key-events as indicators a particular action.
For example, the @kwd[help] logical key-event represents the set of key-events
that request help in a given @hemlock implementation.  This mapping is a
many-to-many mapping, not one-to-one, so a given logical key-event may have
multiple corresponding actual key-events.  Also, any key-event may represent
different logical key-events.
