@node Memory Management
@chapter Memory Management

@menu
* Stacks and Globals::          
* Heap Layout::                 
* Garbage Collection::          
@end menu

@node Stacks and Globals
@section Stacks and Globals

@node Heap Layout
@section Heap Layout

@node Garbage Collection
@section Garbage Collection

@node Interface to C and Assembler
@chapter Interface to C and Assembler


@menu
* Linkage Table::               
@end menu

@node Linkage Table
@section Linkage Table

The linkage table feature is based on how dynamic libraries dispatch.
A table of functions is used which is filled in with the appropriate
code to jump to the correct address.

For @cmucl{}, this table is stored at
@code{target-foreign-linkage-space-start}. Each entry is
@code{target-foreign-linkage-entry-size} bytes long.

At startup, the table is initialized with default values in
@code{os_foreign_linkage_init}. On x86 platforms, the first entry is
code to call the routine @code{resolve_linkage_tramp}. All other
entries jump to the first entry. The function
@code{resolve_linkage_tramp} looks at where it was called from to
figure out which entry in the table was used. It calls
@code{lazy_resolve_linkage} with the address of the linkage entry.
This routine then fills in the appropriate linkage entry with code to
jump to where the real routine is located, and returns the address of
the entry. On return, @code{resolve_linkage_tramp} then just jumps to
the returned address to call the desired function. On all subsequent
calls, the entry no longer points to @code{resolve_linkage_tramp} but
to the real function.

This describes how function calls are made. For foreign data,
@code{lazy_resolve_linkage} stuffs the address of the actual foreign
data into the linkage table. The lisp code then just loads the address
from there to get the actual address of the foreign data.

For sparc, the linkage table is slightly different. The first entry is
the entry for @code{call_into_c} so we never have to look this up. All
other entries are for @code{resolve_linkage_tramp}. This has the
advantage that @code{resolve_linkage_tramp} can be much simpler since
all calls to foreign code go through @code{call_into_c} anyway, and
that means all live Lisp registers have already been saved. Also, to
make life simpler, we lie about @code{closure_tramp} and
@code{undefined_tramp} in the Lisp code. These are really functions,
but we treat them as foreign data since these two routines are only
used as addresses in the Lisp code to stuff into a lisp function
header.

On the Lisp side, there are two supporting data structures for the
linkage table: @code{*linkage-table-data*} and
@code{*foreign-linkage-symbols*}. The latter is a hash table whose key
is the foreign symbol (a string) and whose value is an index into
@code{*linkage-table-data*}.

@code{*linkage-table-data*} is a vector with an unlispy layout. Each
entry has 3 parts:

@itemize
@item symbol name
@item type, a fixnum, 1 = code, 2 = data
@item library list - the library list at the time the symbol is registered.
@end itemize

Whenever a new foreign symbol is defined, a new
@code{*linkage-table-data*} entry is created.
@code{*foreign-linkage-symbols*} is updated with the symbol and the
entry number into @code{*linkage-table-data*}.

The @code{*linkage-table-data*} is accessed from C (hence the unlispy
layout), to figure out the symbol name and the type so that the
address of the symbol can be determined.  The type tells the C code
how to fill in the entry in the linkage-table itself.

@c (Should say something about genesis too, but I don't know how that
@c works other than the initial table is setup with the appropriate first
@c entry.)


@node Low-level debugging
@chapter Low-level debugging

@node Core File Format
@chapter Core File Format
